---
title: 'Napari-3D-Counter: A manual cell counter for napari'
tags:
  - Python
  - Image analysis
  - napari
authors:
  - name: Peter Newstein
    orcid: 0000-0003-2966-783X
    affiliation: "1, 2"
affiliations:
 - name: University of Oregon, Eugene, United States
   index: 1
 - name: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Eugene, United States
   index: 2
date: 3 September 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

A common task across biological fields is to quantify the number of objects in
an image. Often, the most efficient solution to this problem is to have an
expert manually count those objects. Our package, Napari-3D-Counter, includes
the Count3D widget, a user-friendly interface to allow an expert to quickly
count objects in 2D or 3D images visualized using napari, as well as auxiliary
plugins that help to integrate Count3D into upstream and downstream analyses.
Napari-3D-Counter focuses on being user-friendly for beginners and experienced
users, and has been continually updated since its 2023 release. The package is
available on both PyPI and conda-forge, and is indexed on napari-hub.

# Statement of need

Despite the many high-quality automated methods for identifying objects in
images, expert annotation is sometimes the most practical option. For example,
training and optimizing a machine learning model may require more effort than
manual annotation. In these cases, user-friendly software is especially
important to save time for the expert annotator. User-friendliness includes
both ergonomics (whether the software is intuitive and efficient to use) and
stability (whether the software works as expected).

I introduce the package Napari-3D-Counter, which leverages the Python / napari
ecosystem to create a user-friendly interface for manual cell counting. Napari
is a user-friendly multidimensional image viewer that is open source and
implemented in the Python programming language
[@sofroniewNapariMultidimensionalImage2025]. Napari’s implementation language
gives it the advantage of easily integrating with Python's numerous scientific
tools through a plugin system. 

Because napari is under active development, upstream changes can affect
plugins. To keep Napari-3D-Counter reliable, fixes are released promptly with
the aid of unit tests, which cover over 90% of the code. These tests are
automatically run before publication using a GitHub Action.

The functionality of the main widget provided by Napari-3D-Counter, Count3D, is
similar to the FIJI cell counter plugin [@devosCellCounter2010], with
important differences: no macros are necessary for keyboard automation,
locations can be saved in the CSV format instead of XML (enabling easier
integration with GUI spreadsheet tools) and most importantly, integration with
the Python / napari ecosystem. This integration is significant because napari
provides advanced 3D visualization capabilities, while the Python ecosystem
offers powerful packages such as scikit-image
[@waltScikitimageImageProcessing2014] and SciPy
[@virtanenSciPy10Fundamental2020] for analysis.

Native napari Points layers can replicate many of the core features of Count3D.
However, Count3D has the advantage of being specifically specialized to count
cells of different types: it takes one keyboard shortcut to switch between
various cell type counters, and there is a live display of how many cells of
each type have been counted. Furthermore, saving and loading a single CSV file
containing the coordinates of all cells from all types is preferable to
creating separate files for each type. Overall, using Napari-3D-Counter is
likely to save the expert annotator’s time over using native Napari spots.

Finally, Count3D’s functionality is also similar to the manual spots feature of
Imaris [@Imaris2024]. In addition to the ergonomic benefits of a bespoke cell
counter listed above, a clear advantage of Count3D over Imaris is its
availability under a free software license, while Imaris is proprietary
software that requires a costly license.

Beyond Count3D’s core features, other functions related to manual cell counting
are implemented in auxiliary plugins: IngressPoints, SplitOnShapes, and
ReconstructSelected. IngressPoints takes a native napari points layer, perhaps
created by automated labeling, and turns them into a counted cell type in
Count3D. SplitOnShapes splits labels of cell types based on spatial
information. For example, if a user wants to quantify the distribution of cells
of multiple types across segments, they can use a napari Shapes layer to define
all the segments in the X and Y axes, and SplitOnShapes will return a count of
each cell type within each shape. Finally, ReconstructSelected can be used to
aid in visualizing cells: if a user has a Label layer containing some labels
corresponding to cells of interest, and other labels not corresponding, perhaps
created by automated segmentation, ReconstructSelected will convert those
labels containing a Count3D cell into an image layer, which can then be used to
create 2D or 3D images. Overall, these auxiliary plugins help to integrate
Count3D into more complex, semi-automated cell counting processes. 

The utility of this plugin is also reflected in its use. With over 10,000
downloads from conda-forge, a sizable number of users are likely using this
plugin, perhaps due to its ergonomics and stability.

# Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the NIH grant: Genetic and Molecular Studies of
Neurogenesis 5R01HD027056-33 and by the NIH Genetics training program
T32GM149387 as well as by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

# References
